Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
HIGHWAY ENGINEERING PROJECT 
SMART PARKING SYSTEM 
Arduino-Based Prototype with AI Integration Concept 
Subject 
Highway Engineering 
System 
Arduino Uno + Ultrasonic Sensor + 
LEDs 
Scale Model 
Ground Floor Parking Layout (8 Slots) 
Concept 
AI-Integrated Smart Parking 
(Conceptual) 
Year 
2025 - 
Submitted by  
Sachin Ramesh (P24606002) - - 
Yug Shah (P24606011) 
Pratyush Rai (P24606013) - - 
Rithishram N (P24606015) - 
Gayathri A (P24606018) 
Ujwal Rajput (P24606034) 
1 | Page 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
1. Problem Statement 
Urbanisation across India and the world has led to an unprecedented rise in personal vehicle 
ownership. As cities expand and populations grow, traditional parking infrastructure has become 
grossly inadequate. The absence of an intelligent parking management system leads to a wide 
array of problems that affect commuters, city planners, and the environment alike. 
1.1  Key Real-World Challenges 
• Traffic congestion due to vehicles circulating in search of available parking spaces 
contributes significantly to urban gridlock, wasting fuel and increasing travel times. 
• Inefficient land use results when large areas are dedicated to surface parking lots without 
any data-driven management, leading to both under-utilisation and overflow. 
• Increased fuel consumption and carbon emissions are direct consequences of drivers 
spending an average of 10 to 15 minutes searching for parking in busy urban areas. 
• Absence of real-time information prevents drivers from knowing in advance whether a 
parking space is available, forcing them to travel to the location and search manually. 
• Manual parking management relies on attendants and physical checks, which is labour
intensive, error-prone, and not scalable for large facilities. 
• Revenue loss for parking authorities occurs due to improper management, ticket fraud, 
and inability to monitor occupancy accurately. 
Scale of the Problem 
Studies indicate that 30% of urban traffic congestion is caused by drivers searching for parking. A 
smart, sensor-based parking system directly addresses this by providing real-time slot availability, 
reducing search time, and improving overall traffic flow. 
This project proposes an Arduino-based Smart Parking System that uses ultrasonic sensors and 
LED indicators to provide real-time occupancy information. The system conceptually integrates 
Artificial Intelligence through computer vision to further automate entry, exit, and vehicle detection, 
offering a scalable solution for modern parking facilities. 
2 | Page 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
2. Objectives of the Project 
The following objectives define the scope and purpose of this Smart Parking System project: 
1. To design and fabricate a scaled physical model of a ground-floor parking layout 
incorporating a minimum of eight parking slots, a driving aisle, entry and exit gates, 
structural columns, and a ramp connection. 
2. To implement a working electronic prototype using Arduino Uno, ultrasonic distance 
sensors (HC-SR04), and LED indicators to detect vehicle presence in real time and 
display slot occupancy status. 
3. To demonstrate the working principle of sensor-based vehicle detection, where a Red LED 
indicates an occupied slot and a Green LED indicates a vacant slot. 
4. To conceptually explain the integration of Artificial Intelligence — specifically computer 
vision using cameras and Machine Learning models — for enhanced vehicle detection, 
licence plate recognition, and automated access control. 
5. To develop a system architecture diagram illustrating the three functional layers: Sensing 
Layer, Processing Layer, and Output Layer, and explain the data flow between them. 
6. To evaluate and document the advantages, limitations, and future scope of the proposed 
smart parking system in the context of highway engineering and urban mobility. 
7. To produce a project report of academic standard, suitable for college viva evaluation and 
group presentation. 
Project Scope Summary 
Physical model  +  Working electronics  +  AI conceptual design  +  Academic documentation 
3 | Page 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
4 | Page 
 
3. System Components 
 
 
3.1  Hardware Components 
 
Component Description / Role in System 
Arduino Uno R3 Microcontroller board (ATmega328P). Acts as the brain of the system. 
Reads sensor data and controls LED outputs. 
HC-SR04 Ultrasonic 
Sensor 
Measures distance using sound waves. Detects whether a vehicle is 
present in a parking slot. Range: 2 cm to 400 cm. 
Red LED (5mm) Visual indicator for OCCUPIED slot status. Controlled directly by 
Arduino digital output pin. 
Green LED (5mm) Visual indicator for EMPTY slot status. Turns ON when no vehicle is 
detected in the slot. 
220 Ohm Resistors Current-limiting resistors placed in series with each LED to prevent 
damage (one per LED). 
Breadboard (830-point) Solderless prototyping board for assembling the circuit without 
permanent connections. 
Jumper Wires (M-M, M
F) 
Dupont wires connecting Arduino pins to breadboard, sensors, and 
LEDs. 
USB Type-B Cable Used to upload code from a laptop to the Arduino Uno and to supply 
5V operating power. 
 
3.2  Physical Model Components 
 
Model Element Material Used / Description 
Base Floor Slab A1-size 5mm Sunboard (Thermocol) representing the ground-floor 
parking surface at 1:50 scale. 
Perimeter Walls 3mm corrugated cardboard strips forming the outer structural 
boundary of the parking structure. 
Slot Divider Walls Cardboard strips between each bay defining individual parking slots 
(P1 through P8). 
Structural Columns Wooden dowels or bundled ice cream sticks representing RC columns 
supporting the upper slab. 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
Ramp 
Upper Slab (Optional) 
Inclined thick cardboard at approximately 1:7 gradient connecting 
ground floor to upper level. 
Sunboard sheet resting on columns representing the deck of the 
upper parking level. 
Slot Bay Markings 
Entry / Exit Gates 
Yellow chart paper strips simulating painted parking bay boundary 
lines on the floor. 
Cardboard gate posts with wooden skewer boom arms representing 
entry and exit control barriers. 
Toy Cars (Props) 
Small plastic cars placed in slots to visually represent occupied bays 
during demonstration. 
5 | Page 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
4. Working Principle 
4.1  Ultrasonic Sensor — How It Works 
The HC-SR04 Ultrasonic Sensor operates on the principle of sound wave reflection. It consists of 
two components: a Transmitter and a Receiver. 
Ultrasonic Detection Principle 
Step 1:  Arduino sends a HIGH pulse (10 microseconds) to the Trigger (Trig) pin. 
Step 2:  The sensor emits 8 ultrasonic pulses at 40 kHz frequency. 
Step 3:  Sound waves travel forward and bounce back when they hit an object (the vehicle). 
Step 4:  The Echo pin receives the reflected wave and sends a pulse proportional to travel time. 
Step 5:  Arduino calculates distance using:  Distance = (Duration x Speed of Sound) / 2 
4.2  System Decision Logic 
The Arduino continuously reads the distance value from the sensor. Based on a pre-defined 
threshold (typically 15 cm), it makes the following decision: 
Condition 
LED Output 
Distance < 15 cm 
Red LED ON  (Occupied) 
Distance >= 15 cm 
Green LED ON  (Empty) 
Sensor disconnected 
Both LEDs OFF (Error) 
4.3  System Architecture — Three-Layer Model 
The Smart Parking System functions across three distinct layers, each with a specific role: 
SENSING 
LAYER 
HC-SR04 Ultrasonic Sensors (one per smart slot) 
Force Sensitive Resistor (FSR 402) for secondary validation 
IR Sensor at entry/exit gate (optional) 
Camera Module (conceptual — for AI integration) 
6 | Page 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
Data flows upward  ▼ 
PROCESSING 
LAYER 
Arduino Uno — reads sensor values and executes decision logic 
Threshold comparison (distance < 15 cm = occupied) 
AI/ML model (conceptual) — processes camera images for vehicle detection 
Central parking management software (future scope) 
Commands flow downward  ▼ 
OUTPUT 
LAYER 
Red LED indicator — Slot Occupied 
Green LED indicator — Slot Available 
LCD Display (optional) — Shows total slots available 
Mobile App / Web Dashboard (future scope) 
Boom Barrier / Entry Gate Control (future scope) 
7 | Page 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
8 | Page 
 
5. Arduino Code Explanation 
 
 
The following code controls a single smart parking slot using one HC-SR04 ultrasonic sensor and 
two LEDs (Red and Green). The code is written for the Arduino IDE and uploaded to the Arduino 
Uno board. 
 
5.1  Complete Arduino Code 
 
// Smart Parking System — Single Slot 
// Arduino Uno + HC-SR04 + Red/Green LED 
 
// Pin Definitions 
#define TRIG_PIN   9    // Trigger pin of HC-SR04 
#define ECHO_PIN   10   // Echo pin of HC-SR04 
#define RED_LED    7    // Red LED — Occupied 
#define GREEN_LED  6    // Green LED — Empty 
 
// Threshold distance in centimetres 
#define THRESHOLD  15 
 
void setup() { 
  pinMode(TRIG_PIN, OUTPUT);    // Trig is output from Arduino 
  pinMode(ECHO_PIN, INPUT);     // Echo is input to Arduino 
  pinMode(RED_LED, OUTPUT);     // Red LED — output 
  pinMode(GREEN_LED, OUTPUT);   // Green LED — output 
  Serial.begin(9600);           // Start serial monitor 
} 
 
void loop() { 
  long duration; 
  float distance; 
 
  // Step 1: Send trigger pulse 
  digitalWrite(TRIG_PIN, LOW); 
  delayMicroseconds(2); 
  digitalWrite(TRIG_PIN, HIGH); 
  delayMicroseconds(10);         // 10 microsecond pulse 
  digitalWrite(TRIG_PIN, LOW); 
 
  // Step 2: Measure echo return time 
  duration = pulseIn(ECHO_PIN, HIGH); 
 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
9 | Page 
 
  // Step 3: Calculate distance 
  // Speed of sound = 343 m/s = 0.0343 cm/us 
  // Divide by 2 (to and back) 
  distance = duration * 0.0343 / 2; 
 
  // Step 4: Decision logic 
  if (distance < THRESHOLD && distance > 0) { 
    digitalWrite(RED_LED,   HIGH);  // Slot OCCUPIED 
    digitalWrite(GREEN_LED, LOW); 
    Serial.println("Status: OCCUPIED"); 
  } else { 
    digitalWrite(RED_LED,   LOW);   // Slot EMPTY 
    digitalWrite(GREEN_LED, HIGH); 
    Serial.println("Status: EMPTY"); 
  } 
 
  delay(500);  // Check every 500 milliseconds 
} 
 
5.2  Line-by-Line Explanation 
 
Code Section What It Does 
#define TRIG_PIN 9 Assigns a name to the Arduino pin number. Makes code readable. 
#define THRESHOLD 15 Sets the detection threshold at 15 cm. Adjust based on sensor 
height. 
void setup() Runs once when Arduino powers on. Sets pin directions 
(Input/Output). 
void loop() Runs repeatedly in a loop. This is where sensing and decisions 
happen. 
digitalWrite(TRIG, HIGH) Sends a 10-microsecond pulse to activate the ultrasonic sensor. 
pulseIn(ECHO_PIN, HIGH) Measures the time (in microseconds) for echo to return. 
distance = duration * 0.0343 
/ 2 Converts time to distance using speed of sound formula. 
if (distance < THRESHOLD) If object is within 15 cm, a vehicle is present — turn Red LED ON. 
else If no vehicle detected (distance >= 15 cm) — turn Green LED ON. 
delay(500) Wait 500 ms before next reading. Prevents sensor false readings. 
 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
Viva Tip — Key Formula 
Distance (cm) = Duration (microseconds) x 0.0343 / 2 
The factor 0.0343 is the speed of sound (343 m/s) in cm/microsecond. Division by 2 accounts for 
the round trip (signal goes to object and returns back). 
10 | P age 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
6. Physical Model Description 
The physical model is a scaled representation of a real-world ground-floor smart parking facility. It 
is constructed at a 1:50 scale, meaning 1 cm on the model represents 50 cm in the actual structure. 
The model serves as a visual aid for understanding the spatial layout, traffic flow, and structural 
elements of a modern parking system. 
6.1  Layout Description 
• Eight parking slots (P1 to P8) are arranged in two rows of four — four on the left side and 
four on the right side of a central driving aisle. 
• The central driving aisle runs along the longitudinal axis of the model, with one-way 
directional flow: vehicles enter from the front and exit from the rear (or vice versa, 
depending on layout configuration). 
• A ramp at the rear-centre of the model represents access to an upper parking deck. The 
ramp is designed at approximately 1:7 gradient (approximately 8 degrees), which is within 
standard vehicular ramp design limits. 
• Structural columns are positioned at the intersection of each slot divider and the aisle 
boundary walls, simulating reinforced concrete columns that support the upper slab. 
• Entry and exit gates with boom barrier arms are placed at the front of the model, 
separating the entry lane (left) from the exit lane (right). 
• An optional upper floor slab rests on the columns, demonstrating the concept of a multi
storey parking structure. 
6.2  What Each Element Represents 
Model Element 
Real-World Equivalent 
Sunboard Base 
Ground floor concrete slab of parking structure 
Cardboard Walls 
Masonry or RCC perimeter boundary walls 
Wooden Dowel Columns 
Reinforced concrete (RCC) structural columns 
Yellow Strip Lines 
Painted bay markings on parking floor surface 
Ramp 
Vehicle access ramp to upper parking level 
Gate with Boom Arm 
Entry/exit boom barrier with access control system 
11 | P age 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
Toy Cars in Slots 
Upper Slab (Optional) 
Parked vehicles occupying bays during operation 
Deck / rooftop of ground floor forming upper level floor 
LED near each slot 
Digital occupancy indicator panel (Red = Occupied, Green = Free) 
12 | P age 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
7. AI Integration — Conceptual Explanation 
While our prototype uses ultrasonic sensors for vehicle detection, a fully advanced smart parking 
system integrates Artificial Intelligence (AI) to further automate and enhance parking management. 
This section conceptually explains how AI, particularly Computer Vision and Machine Learning, can 
be incorporated into such a system. 
7.1  What is AI in the Context of Parking? 
Artificial Intelligence refers to the capability of machines to simulate human intelligence — 
particularly the ability to see, understand, and make decisions. In a smart parking context, AI 
replaces or supplements physical sensors by using cameras and image recognition algorithms to 
detect vehicles, recognise number plates, and manage access control. 
7.2  Computer Vision — The Core AI Component 
Computer Vision is the branch of AI that enables machines to interpret visual information from the 
real world. A camera installed above each parking slot captures images continuously. These images 
are fed into a Machine Learning model trained to distinguish between an empty parking slot and an 
occupied one. 
How Computer Vision Works in a Parking System 
1.  Camera captures a real-time image of the parking slot at regular intervals. 
2.  Image is sent to an AI processor (e.g., Raspberry Pi, cloud server). 
3.  A pre-trained ML model (CNN — Convolutional Neural Network) analyses the image. 
4.  Model classifies the slot as OCCUPIED or EMPTY based on learned visual patterns. 
5.  Result is communicated to the display system and management database in real time. 
7.3  Licence Plate Recognition (LPR) 
A key AI application in smart parking is Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR), also called 
Licence Plate Recognition (LPR). A camera at the entry gate captures the vehicle's number plate. 
An Optical Character Recognition (OCR) algorithm reads the plate number. The system checks the 
number against a database to identify registered vehicles, grant or deny access, and log entry/exit 
timestamps automatically. 
13 | P age 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
14 | Page 
 
 
7.4  AI vs. Sensor-Based Comparison 
 
Feature Ultrasonic Sensor (Our System) AI Camera System (Conceptual) 
Detection Method Distance measurement Image recognition 
Cost Very low (Rs. 40-80) Moderate to high 
Accuracy High for simple detection Very high (with good training) 
Vehicle Info Not captured Number plate, vehicle type 
Works in darkness Yes (sound-based) Requires IR camera 
Scalability Limited (one sensor per slot) One camera covers multiple slots 
Implementation 
Complexity Beginner-friendly Advanced — requires ML knowledge 
 
7.5  AI Architecture for a Full Smart Parking System 
 
A comprehensive AI-integrated smart parking system would follow this pipeline: 
 
Stage Description 
Data Collection Cameras installed above each slot and at entry/exit gates continuously 
capture images. 
Pre-processing Images are resized, enhanced, and prepared for analysis (noise removal, 
contrast adjustment). 
AI Detection A CNN model (e.g., YOLO or MobileNet) identifies vehicles and classifies 
slot status. 
Decision Making System determines which slots are free and communicates this to drivers 
via display boards. 
Database Update Entry/exit logs, slot availability, and revenue data are updated in real time. 
User Interface Drivers see available slots on LED boards, mobile apps, or web 
dashboards before entering. 
  
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
15 | Page 
 
8. Advantages of the System 
 
 
The Smart Parking System — both in its prototype and conceptual AI form — offers significant 
benefits over conventional manual parking management: 
 
Advantage Explanation 
Real-Time Slot 
Detection 
Ultrasonic sensors provide instant vehicle presence data without any 
human involvement, ensuring accuracy at all times. 
Reduced Traffic 
Congestion 
Drivers are guided directly to available slots, eliminating the need to 
circle the parking area and reducing aisle congestion. 
Energy Efficiency LEDs consume far less power than fluorescent or incandescent 
signboards. The system runs on 5V from a USB source. 
Scalability The system can be easily expanded — additional sensors and LEDs 
can be added to cover more slots with the same Arduino. 
Low Cost of 
Implementation 
The entire working prototype can be built for under Rs. 1,000, making 
it viable for small and medium-scale parking facilities. 
No Manual Monitoring Automation eliminates the need for parking attendants to manually 
check and direct vehicles to available spaces. 
Data Collection With an LCD or connected computer, the system can log occupancy 
patterns over time, helping operators plan for peak demand. 
AI Upgrade Potential The system architecture is designed to accept AI/camera modules in 
the future, allowing a gradual and cost-effective upgrade path. 
Safety Proper lane management with dedicated entry and exit gates reduces 
the risk of accidents within the parking facility. 
Improved User 
Experience 
Drivers can find parking faster, reducing frustration and improving 
overall customer satisfaction at the facility. 
  
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
9. Limitations of the System 
While the prototype effectively demonstrates the concept of a smart parking system, several 
limitations exist in both the current hardware implementation and the conceptual AI design: 
9.1  Hardware / Prototype Limitations 
• The current prototype implements only two smart slots. Scaling to eight or more slots 
requires additional sensors and careful management of Arduino pin allocations. 
• Ultrasonic sensors can produce false readings under certain conditions, such as highly 
angled vehicle surfaces, sensor misalignment, or environmental interference. 
• The prototype lacks wireless communication. In a real system, sensor data would need to 
be transmitted over WiFi or GSM to a central server or mobile application. 
• There is no persistent data storage (memory) in the current setup. Occupancy history is 
not recorded once the system is powered off. 
• The physical model is constructed from cardboard and Sunboard at 1:50 scale and is not 
structurally analogous to a real reinforced concrete parking structure. 
9.2  AI Integration Limitations 
• Computer vision systems require well-trained ML models. Training requires large datasets 
of parking lot images under various lighting and weather conditions. 
• AI cameras and computing hardware (e.g., Raspberry Pi with camera module, or cloud 
infrastructure) significantly increase system cost compared to a sensor-only setup. 
• In poor lighting, fog, or rain, camera-based systems may produce inaccurate results 
unless infrared cameras are deployed. 
• Privacy concerns arise when cameras are installed in public or semi-public parking areas, 
especially if they capture persons alongside vehicle data. 
• Power failure or network disconnection can bring the entire AI-dependent system to a halt 
unless robust backup mechanisms are in place. 
9.3  Summary Table 
16 | P age 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
10. Conclusion 
The rapid growth of urban vehicular traffic has rendered traditional parking infrastructure inadequate 
and inefficient. The Smart Parking System presented in this project demonstrates a practical, cost
effective, and scalable approach to addressing the chronic problem of parking space management 
in modern cities. 
The working prototype, built on an Arduino Uno platform with HC-SR04 ultrasonic sensors and LED 
indicators, successfully validates the core principle of automated vehicle detection and real-time 
slot status indication. The system accurately distinguishes between occupied and vacant parking 
slots using distance threshold logic, and communicates occupancy status through colour-coded 
LED outputs — red for occupied and green for empty — without the need for any manual 
intervention. 
The physical scale model at 1:50 ratio effectively represents the spatial layout of a ground-floor 
parking facility, incorporating all essential elements of a real-world parking structure: parking bays, 
driving aisle, entry and exit gates with boom barriers, structural columns, and a vehicular ramp. This 
model serves as an important visual and educational tool for understanding both the engineering 
design and the operational logic of the proposed system. 
The conceptual integration of Artificial Intelligence — through computer vision and machine learning 
— demonstrates the potential for significant advancement beyond the current prototype. A camera
based AI system using Convolutional Neural Networks can detect vehicles with greater spatial 
coverage, recognise licence plates for access control, and provide richer operational data for facility 
management. This represents a natural and achievable evolution of the system as hardware costs 
continue to decline and AI tools become more accessible. 
From a highway engineering perspective, smart parking systems contribute directly to reducing 
urban congestion, lowering carbon emissions, and improving the overall efficiency of road networks. 
As the first and last mile of every vehicle journey begins and ends with parking, intelligent 
management of parking resources is a critical component of sustainable urban mobility planning. 
In conclusion, this project successfully achieves its stated objectives: the design and construction 
of a physical model, the implementation of a working electronic prototype, and a thorough 
conceptual analysis of AI integration potential. The system is simple enough to be understood and 
reproduced at a student level, yet rich enough in its architecture and future scope to serve as a 
credible entry point into the domain of intelligent transportation infrastructure. 
17 | P age 
Smart Parking System  |  Highway Engineering Project                                                      
Future Scope 
1.  Integration of ESP8266/ESP32 for real-time IoT-based monitoring via mobile application. 
2.  Addition of LCD display showing live count of available vs. occupied slots. 
3.  Camera-based AI for number plate recognition and automated billing system. 
4.  Solar power integration to make the system fully self-sustaining. 
5.  Multi-floor expansion with ramp sensor and centralised floor-wise slot management. 
18 | P age 